I have very much enjoyed my experience in Latin 101 this semester. It has heavily increased my appreciation for the Latin language as a whole as well as my understanding on how the Classics intersect with a Liberal Arts education. My grasp on root words in English, the proper uses of present vs. past tenses and the implementation of proper usage of pronouns is stronger because of this class. A heavy theme in the beginning of our course was the conversation on how Latin has typically been taught to strictly the upper-class, contributing to the cultural and racial divide between socio-economic groups in society. Latin is considered as one of the most exclusive and elitist languages; access to its teachings have been limited to people of color and minority groups alike. Although Latin is now considered a dead language, it still has an overwhelming presence in cultures around the world, serving as the root for romance languages such as Spanish, Italian and French. Our discussion of the Latin subjunctive and its presence in various languages furthers this point; a tense that allows one to consider the possibilities of the future while simultaneously giving the ability to consider what could have happened in the past. This is an interesting paradox as it provides hope for what’s to come and also the option to dwell on what’s behind us, characterized as the ‘dark side of the subjunctive’. One would hope that the option to focus on the ‘would’ and ‘could’ functions of the subjunctive outweigh the contrary.
	Taking into account my work from CBL semester, I greatly valued discussion with other students from various sections to further my studies of Latin. We were able to exchange study tricks, nuances in the language that we picked up and grow our cumulative knowledge on the course. Although we were unable to meet with local Worcester elementary students, the work and dedication to our thought projects put us in a fantastic spot for possible collaborations in the future. I hope that these efforts can go a long way in the implementation of Latin curriculum in public schools and inspire studies of Latin for years to come. While Zoom is not the ideal space for learning a language, Professor Smith’s dedication to his students, emphasis on community in the virtual classroom and willingness to extend a helping hand made all the difference in the world. I am eagerly awaiting my opportunity to get into the classroom next semester and further my studies of the language. Some say it is ill-advised to save your language requirement for senior year, I would respond that I saved the best for last. Thank you, Professor!
